[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Yeah, this is
Holmesburg Prison.
Seals used to be up in
there keeping an eye.
[INAUDIBLE]
>> At the end of the '60s,
Leodus Jones was a prisoner
here in Holmesburg, a suburb
of Philadelphia in the United
States.
A prisoner, but also a
Guinea pig for industry,
like thousands of other inmates.
>> H block, this is where all
the medical tests and the human
experimentation was going on.
>> How many times have
you taken that corridor?
>> Oh, man, about
maybe 25, 30 times.
But there was different
tests that they was running,
and sometimes, I was on like,
two tests at a time, you know?
>> OK.
>> This practice was
confidential at the time
because multinational chemical
companies came here to test
the risks of their products.
To earn a few
dollars, the prisoners
participated in several
tests, but none of them
knew what they were being given.
>> What they would do, they
would put the tape and stick
and then pull, then
stick and then pull,
then stick and then pull it,
then they would put and drop
of the substance, whatever
it was that was in it,
on that area.
>> And what happened after?
- All over my body,
my skin pigmentation
got light in certain areas.
>> How long did it last?
>> About a year.
Somewhere around there.
And they had you
signing a paper stating
that it was informed consent,
that it was just some paper
to waive them from being
liable if anything go wrong.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> One company did everything
they could to keep this
a secret.
They even paid Leodus
Jones for his silence.
Dow Chemical.
The leading manufacturer
of plastics in the world
and the third largest
manufacturer of pesticides,
Dow Chemical has an annual
turnover of $48 billion
and 50,000 employees
around the globe.
In the wake of this
chemical giant,
there is an industry of
staggering profitability,
an industry in a frantic
race to innovate.
Each year, their new toxic
products reach the market.
These multinationals
all have one thing
in common, a culture of secrecy.
>> They're following us.
>> Polluting lands,
rivers, and groundwater.
Behind the fumes
of these factories,
we have discovered tens
of thousands of victims.
In India, children are born
with severe disabilities.
In the US, those who have
dedicated their lives
to this industry--
>> Everybody wanted to
go there for the money,
for the benefits, it was secure.
>> --are now paying the price.
>> Those guys are all
dead, and I should've been.
Why'd they lie?
>> Faced with these tragedies,
the chemical giants have
adopted a specific course of
action, lack of transparency,
cynicism, denial.
In the meantime, they
continue to reap the profits.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In Holmesburg Prison, Dow
experimented on the inmates
with one of the most
carcinogenic products
in the world, dioxin.
It's one of the molecules
in Agent Orange,
the powerful herbicide that Dow
produced for the American Army
during the Vietnam War.
The Air Force dumped it on
the Viet Cong for a decade.
At the same time, the tests were
being performed at Holmesburg.
From that time on,
Dow was already aware
of the dangers of dioxin.
The company put it in writing
in this confidential note
from June, 1965.
"Dioxin is exceptionally toxic."
Some months later, Dow
would study its side effects
on the prisoners.
>> Hey, man, what can I say?
There's no way in the world if
they would've informed us back
then that we would participate.
No.
No, no, I wouldn't have.
They're trying to cover it up.
They didn't want nobody to know.
>> We found one of the doctors
that performed the tests
at Holmesburg in the 1960s.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Today, he's an oncologist
at Northwestern Hospital
in Chicago.
Sigmund Weitzman is
preparing to retire.
He is one of the few
witnesses still alive.
>> Every day, I had
a row of 20 convicts.
They were coming in all day.
- All day long,
people were coming in?
>> Oh, absolutely.
It was a machine.
>> In 1967, Sigmund Weitzman
was only 21 years old.
He was an intern at Holmesburg.
The senior physician
overseeing the tests
never told him the names of the
products used on the prisoners.
He only realized later that
he had administered dioxin
to human beings.
We show him what Dow knew
back then about the chemical.
>> This serial is
exceptionally toxic.
No wonder it's confidential.
This is 50 years old.
>> Yeah.
>> It's very upsetting.
>> This is the first time
you read these documents?
>> Yes.
>> Well, I'm--
>> I'm appalled.
I'm just very-- it's so casual.
I also felt personally guilty
that I was participating
in something so horrible.
You don't give people poison.
It's just simple.
It's as if these
people aren't people.
They're just
experimental animals.
Nowadays, it would be criminal.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Dow was never prosecuted.
When prisoners tried to take
action against the company,
the statute of
limitations had expired.
This multinational
would not only
poison inmates with dioxin,
but also tens of thousands
of people in Midland, Michigan
in the north of the US.
Midland, the birthplace of Dow.
>> Here at the Dow Chemical
Company in Midland, Michigan,
revolutionary chemical killers.
>> This is where Agent
Orange was manufactured.
Its production created waste
extremely high in dioxin.
Dow secretly dumped this
waste into the river
that flows through the city.
In 1981, one man would
discover the truth.
>> We had a conclusion there
that Dow was a major source
and not the only source to
the river, and certainly,
to the community, and
that people were at risk.
>> At the time, Milton Clark
was a taxologist for the EPA,
the government agency
responsible for environmental
protection.
With his colleagues,
he wrote a report
condemning Dow's practices.
But right before the
report's publication,
the corporation would succeed
in pressuring the acting
chief of the EPA in Washington.
>> We went into shock.
We had never heard of such
a thing being done ever,
that the company that
we were regulating,
they would have the
right to review a report,
comment on it before
it's released.
>> And what did they
ask you about that?
>> That it was critically
important to say that people
were at risk, but they
did not want that.
They just basically want
to squash the report.
>> OK.
>> And eventually, the final
report, they prevailed,
and so they truncated it down
and removed critical sections
and all the conclusions
were taken away.
>> Pressured by his superiors,
Milton Clark was forced
to censor the report.
The result, pollution
in Midland, Michigan
would continue for 30
years with impunity,
and the executives at Dow would
continue denying the dangers.
>> There is no health
problem in Midland.
There is absolutely
no evidence of dioxin
doing any damage to humans.
>> In 2006, one woman would
attack the multinational again.
At the time, Mary Gade
oversaw all the officers
at the Environmental Agency
in the Midland region.
She had leverage.
She'd been nominated by
the President of the United
States, George W Bush.
Newly appointed, she
demands that more testing
be done in the city.
>> We found these astronomically
high levels of dioxin,
levels that my staff think may
be some of the highest levels
ever found in the United States.
One of the things that
was astonishing to me
when this came to my attention
was that for almost 30 years,
this very serious problem had
not actually been addressed.
>> Where have you found
these high levels?
>> We found it in yards
alongside the river system,
parks where children play,
where people launch their boats,
where fishermen put
their boats in the water.
This is where people live.
So I immediately called Dow
senior officials and said,
we're very concerned
about these levels,
we need you to take action.
As that unfolded, the
company was not happy.
It's extremely
expensive to clean up
this much contamination,
hundreds of millions
of dollars, if not more.
>> To lodge a complaint, Dow
goes directly to the White
House.
>> I was asked on May 1 of
2008 to either resign or quit
by the end of the day.
>> OK.
Were you surprised?
>> Yes, very much so.
In my 30 some years of working
in environmental protection,
and much of that spent
in the government,
I would have never
expected that.
That was acting in
its own interests,
so Dow was trying to make sure
that it saved as much money
as possible.
>> As a result of these
maneuvers, for decades,
thousands of people have lived
surrounded by dioxin without
knowing the risks.
We wanted to meet these
victims, but in Midland, it's
hard to loosen tongues.
Dow has supported the
city for 120 years,
and reminders are
at every corner.
At the bank, the stadium,
the library, the public park,
the high school.
the shadow of the
company is everywhere.
Only one person agreed to
break the code of silence.
Alice Buchalter has
spent most of her life
here near the river.
This is where she
raised her family.
>> Oh, this is where we used
to have the zip line way back
here.
>> OK.
>> We used to have all trails
that went down through here.
I don't even know if you can
see any of them over here.
But 18 years-- and the
land is very fertile,
and it was used for motocross
trails, and hiking trails,
and dune buggy trails, and
just recreation in the woods.
For a kid, it was
like a wonderland.
It was an adventure.
They could explore, and
they could build forts,
and they could do
all those things.
>> No one advised you that
there was dioxin down there?
>> No.
We just that we found
a magical spot for us
to play and raise a family.
>> For nearly 40 years, the
Buchalter family would live
here, blissfully unaware of
their toxic surroundings.
Every spring, the river
floods their garden,
bringing in a fresh
wave of dioxin.
Alice Buchalter
would not discover
the true extent of the
contamination until 2007.
When tests were
conducted in her garden
by the local environmental
agency, the levels of dioxin
were up to 17 times higher than
the legal limit for toxicity.
>> I have my oldest daughter
has autoimmune diseases.
>> You have five kids?
>> Mm-hmm.
>> How many of them do
have autoimmune disease?
>> I would say all of them,
some to a lesser degree,
and some to a more
severe degree.
And my husband had a very
malignant colon cancer.
It was a real quick onset.
>> Her late husband, Herbert
Buchalter, was a doctor.
A few days before he passed
away, he expressed a last wish.
>> He was brave enough
to, when he was dying,
to have his blood drawn when
he didn't have very much blood
left.
Dioxin levels were
taken the Thursday
before he died on a Sunday.
He was willing to
do it to ascertain
that there was a connection.
The results of my husband's.
This is his levels.
These are the actual breakdown.
>> Alice Buchalter's husband
had 64.5 nanograms of dioxin per
liter of blood, 3
times the US average.
>> We had been married
46 years when he died,
and would I have
treasured 10 more years?
Yeah.
That's been a major
impact on my life.
>> The American Environmental
Agency has finally forced Dow
to clean the river, but the
process has only just begun.
It could take decades
and cost hundreds
of millions of dollars.
However, no date is set for
decontaminating neighboring
yards, like Alice Buchalter's.
Dow refused all our
requests for an interview.
The multinational
merely sent us an email
stating that, "we seek
science-based solutions that
protect human health
while also contributing
to the well-being of
the local community."
On the other side of the
world, another contamination
is wreaking havoc.
As a result of one of the
worst industrial catastrophes
in history, thousands of
children have been affected,
but Dow has never dealt with it.
It happened in India in Bhopal.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In 1984, the local
chemical plant
exploded, killing 20,000
people and releasing
tons of toxic products.
At the time, the
factory belonged
to Union Carbide,
a pesticide giant
that Dow would buy up in 2001.
The site of the Bhopal
explosion is still
saturated with
chemical pollution.
Over the years,
these products have
spread into the city's
groundwater systems.
For 15 years, the
inhabitants have demanded
a full decontamination in vain.
Dow refuses to act.
The decaying steel site
is still accessible today.
Here, we meet Mr. Chaun,
a former engineer.
At the time, he was in charge
of the storage of the chemicals
in this laboratory.
>> So what are
all those bottles?
>> There's so many chemicals
that are still there meaning
in this quality control lab.
A few bottles have
now at present,
but after the disaster,
this quality control lab
was full of the chemicals.
Water drums [INAUDIBLE]
is still there lying.
>> Is that dangerous?
>> Yeah, it is dangerous,
because there's no proper care
of this premises.
>> Among the products stored in
the factory, there was Lindane,
an extremely toxic insecticide.
Today, it is forbidden
all over the world.
According to our guide, the
soil surrounding the factory
is full of it.
>> This whole area is
highly contaminated.
And this is the local pit there.
They are dumping all toxic
waste and filling underground.
Right now, you can
feel this smell
of the benzene
hexachloride on this spot,
and it is dangerous to
stay here for long periods.
>> Benzene hexachloride is the
scientific name for Lindane.
We go down to the area of the
spill to take some samples.
The smell is unbearable.
We'll have the soil analyzed.
Just before leaving,
Mr. Chuan shows us
where the pesticides were made.
Here, beads of mercury lie
exposed in the open air.
According to the World
Health Organization,
this is one of the top 10
most dangerous chemical
products in the world.
We take some more samples.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> The results of our two
tests are astonishing.
Inside the factory,
the level of mercury
is five million
times higher than
the environmental standard.
At this level of
concentration, the risks
of developing liver, skin, or
lung cancers are considerable.
The levels of Lindane
are just as alarming,
exceeding 100,000 times
the standard level.
This can provoke severe cases
of cerebral degeneration.
Yet only 20 meters away, we
see children playing cricket
on the contaminated ground.
>> Hi.
>> My name is Saja.
My name is Saja.
>> Do you often come
to play cricket here?
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah, but do you know
that's a chemical plant?
That is dangerous.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> These children come here
every day to play on the land
near the factory.
They don't seem to realize the
risk that they are exposed to.
>> Why are you playing inside
the factory and not outside?
>> Yeah, yeah.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> These kids are not the
only ones in danger in Bhopal.
The chemical
contamination stretches
far beyond the walls
of the factory.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Toxic waste has
penetrated the land
and has polluted the water
of many neighborhoods
up to 3 kilometers
from the factory.
50,000 people live there.
We went to take water samples
to identify the molecules
present in their wells.
Like in [INAUDIBLE] family home.
They've lived in this
house for almost 30 years.
The water they consume
contains 1.9 micrograms
of mercury per liter, 2 times
the standard level of toxicity.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> The problem is,
even in boiled water,
mercury is still carcinogenic.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> In other areas of
Bhopal, it's not mercury,
but Lindane that wreaks
havoc on human lives.
This is a problem in Preet
Nagar, a neighborhood situated
1 kilometer away
from the factory.
The municipality has had
drinkable water since 2011,
but for many years,
the inhabitants
have been drinking
severely polluted water.
That's the case for Rukmani
and her 13-year-old daughter,
Rachna.
Since her birth, she's suffered
from limited mental development
and muscular dystrophy.
She can neither talk
nor stand up by herself.
Rukmani, her mother, drank
contaminated water every day
during her pregnancy.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> A few months
after Rachna's birth,
a governmental study was
conducted in the area.
The levels of Lindane
were extremely high
in the water, 17 times the
World Health Organization limit.
>> Did you know that the water
you were drinking when you were
pregnant was full of
pesticides from the factory?
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> What's going to
happen to Rachna now?
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Due to her disabilities,
Rachna has never been able
to go to school.
Every day, she comes to the
Chingari Rehabilitation Centre.
Without these daily
exercises, she
would be completely
paralyzed today.
Rashida Bee is the
founder of the center.
She has watched all
these children grow up.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> 850 children are now
registered at Rashida
Bee's center.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> So is Dow Chemical
paying for any of this?
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> In 2015, Dow gave $4.5
billion to its shareholders,
but not a single cent has been
given to the decontamination
of Bhopal.
For weeks, we tried to
reach the Communications
Department at Dow to get an
interview without success.
>> --the water
that people drinks.
Who's going to answer
these questions?
It's really important.
>> I'm not aware of who that is
right off the top of my head.
We have 50,000 employees.
So I'll have to
do some research.
>> Dow never called us
back, so we decided to go
to the company's general
assembly in Midland in the US
to ask our questions.
Cameras are not
allowed inside, so we
stayed in the parking lot.
>> Sorry.
You are a Dow shareholder?
Yeah, have you been talking
about Bhopal this year?
Were there any resolution?
>> Excuse me, sir.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Sir.
>> What?
>> May I ask you to
please leave the property.
>> OK.
>> If you refuse to leave
you will be arrested
for trespassing, you understand?
>> Here.
>> You understand?
>> Yeah, I understand.
>> You will be arrested.
>> We quickly realized
that we were not welcome.
>> Yes, sir.
>> We're going to call
this tree line right here.
>> OK, so I can stay there?
>> Not going to stop traffic
that's trying to exit.
>> OK.
>> So we carefully followed
their rules for 45 long minutes
until the communications
department at Dow decided
to finally set foot outside.
>> Hello.
Sorry to disturb you.
I'm a French journalist.
>> Yeah, we're the
corporate media relations.
>> Ah, can we talk?
>> No, sorry.
>> Why?
>> I don't have anything to say.
>> You don't want to
talk about Bhopal?
You don't want to talk about
the kids that are sick there?
>> No, I'm sorry.
It wouldn't be appropriate
for me to say anything.
>> Why?
>> So we thought of
another solution.
We would bring our
questions directly
to the personal residence of
the CEO of Dow, Mr. Liveris,
along with this letter.
We displayed an
American-style election sign
to make sure that
he wouldn't miss it.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Get off the property, guy.
>> Hello, sir.
I'm not on the property here.
Don't worry.
Are you working for Mr. Liveris?
>> I work for the
company at Dow.
>> Are you working for Dow?
Are you concerned about--
>> Security.
>> Are you concerned about
what's happening in Bhopal?
You know there are still
contaminating-- look, the kids.
Look, Rachna, she's
just 13 years old.
>> It's terrible.
I understand.
>> So why Dow is
not doing anything?
>> I don't know, sir.
Couldn't tell you.
>> But doesn't touch you?
You don't mind?
>> It effects everybody, sir.
>> So why Dow is
not doing anything?
>> A few days later, we finally
received an email from Dow.
The company laments, "Bhopal
was a terrible tragedy
that we will never forget."
But they relieve themselves
of all responsibility,
stating that, "we acquired
Union Carbide more than 16 years
after the catastrophe of 1984."
>> Dow continues to address
global issues through human
solutions, issues
like clean water,
as important as life itself.
Dow is working to make water
safe and readily available
to people all over the globe.
>> The human element.
Nothing is more fundamental,
nothing more elemental.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In Dow's wake, countless
victims and human tragedies
pile up without any damage
to the company's profits.
In December, 2015, Dow announced
the biggest financial operation
in its history, a
merger of $130 billion
with another American
chemical giant, DuPont.
A match made in heaven.
>> You and DuPont.
There's a lot of good
chemistry between us.
>> DuPont made its
fortune with dynamite.
>> Dynamite.
>> Nylon.
And Teflon.
>> (SINGING) Don't get stuck.
>> The magical material that
prevents food from sticking
to pans.
>> (SINGING) Here's what you
want, DuPont, DuPont, DuPont.
Without these seals
you're out of luck.
>> Don't get stuck.
>> However, behind
the success of Teflon,
DuPont hides a dark secret.
>> I just can't believe that
DuPont and money means more
than people.
>> There's people dying
because of what they've done.
>> DuPont knew years ago
what they were doing.
>> At best, it's despicable.
And at the worst, it's criminal.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> At the heart of this drama
is one city, Parkersburg,
lost in the eastern US.
The city was built around
the DuPont factory.
Suzanne Bailey came
here in 1978 to work
on the Teflon production lines.
>> I went to work in
May the 8th, 1978.
That was my glorious
day, right there.
They took our pictures.
>> It's you?
>> That's me.
Without gray hair.
>> In the middle?
>> Yep.
I was so happy.
>> You're smiling.
>> I was.
That was the elite job.
I mean, everybody
want to go there
for the money, for the benefits,
and everything like that.
It was secure.
>> The chemical industry
is a growing one,
growing by leaps and bounds.
>> I mean, you could just
mention the DuPont name
and doors swung open.
It was like princes coming
through the door, you know?
>> Yes, in such an environment,
you can look to a bright future
with confidence and optimism.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Were you happy so?
>> I was thrilled.
I was absolutely
thrilled to death.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> A few months after
starting her job at DuPont,
Suzanne Bailey became pregnant.
In January of 1981, she
gives birth to little Bucky.
>> When he was born,
it was very traumatic.
They didn't know
what to do with him.
They'd never seen
anything like it.
I could not figure
out what happened.
He had half a
nostril, half a nose,
the eye is a keyhole pupil.
I didn't know what to do.
I was afraid he was
going to die in my arms.
I had no idea what was wrong.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
This is our cue, isn't it?
>> Bucky survived.
He is now 35 years old.
But his childhood was
spent between his home
and the hospital.
>> I had 30 surgeries in a span
of six or seven years where
they took a rib cartilage
to form my nose.
I have a metal plate here.
They stretched my
forehead out so
that they could use that skin
and bring it down and mold
my nose here.
I still only have one
natural functioning nostril.
>> We had to put the hockey
mask on him and the guards
because he wasn't allowed
to touch his face.
>> For how long?
>> He had to wear those for,
I would say, three months,
four months.
>> That's a long time.
>> Yeah.
The only way that he got to
take them off was just to eat.
>> How is it as a kid to grow up
and to have so many surgeries?
I mean, it's pretty intense.
>> Walking out in public
and going into a store
or a restaurant, and soon as you
enter, all the eyes are on you.
In school, when you
go in and you're
trying to make new friends, all
they see is you're different.
>> After her maternity leave,
Suzanne Bailey began to suspect
her job as the cause
of Bucky's deformities.
A mysterious source tips
her off to one molecule
in particular, C-8,
the molecule in Teflon
that stops food from
sticking to pans.
>> When I went back
to work the first day,
I went to the locker and I
found the paper laying there.
I picked it up and I
began reading about it.
It was talking about how
the rats were fed the C-8
and what deformities that
it had around their face,
and I thought, that
sounds just like Becky.
>> It was very similar
to what Bucky had.
>> Absolutely.
Very similar, almost
identical to what he had.
That's why I knew that
there was something wrong.
That's why it connect.
>> The scientific studies
Suzanne Bailey found had been
conducted by a
subcontractor of DuPont.
It studied baby rats whose
mothers were exposed to C-8.
They developed
abnormal eye lenses.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I immediately walked out that
door, went down to medical,
and I said, is this
what's wrong with my baby?
Oh, no, no, no.
Nothing on this
plant will hurt you.
That was the motto.
That's what they always say.
>> Yeah.
>> Nothing here will hurt you.
>> But in the meantime, DuPont
was secretly investigating
the pregnant women
working in their factory.
Two out of seven children
born to the factory
workers had facial
deformities like Bucky.
Shortly after, DuPont
decided to transfer
Suzanne Bailey
and her colleagues
to other departments.
At the time, Kenton Wamsley
also worked in the manufacturing
department of Teflon.
He remembers the discussion
he had with his manager.
>> He said, can we send all
the women home out of Teflon?
All of them.
He said, oh, don't worry.
It won't hurt the
men, just the women.
We feel that it
can cause trouble.
So I thought, won't hurt me.
>> Kenton Wamsley
was a lab technician.
He handled C-8 for 30 years.
>> Breathed the fumes from them,
all the samples we breathe.
But we just-- at
the time, we thought
DuPont would take care
of us, so I just did
my jobs for years and years.
And we didn't realize our
health was an issue then.
Surgeon diagnosed
me as having cancer.
They had to take all of my
rectum, part of my colon.
>> They're giving you that?
>> Yeah, for every five years.
>> Now Kenton Wamsley has
to live with an ostonomy bag
attached to his stomach.
He changes it day and night.
At the factory, he
worked in a team
with three other technicians.
>> My buddies, people I really
loved, seen them every day,
cared about them, those
guys, they're all dead,
and I should have been.
They didn't even see retirement.
None of them.
>> Wamsley and his colleagues
were never warned about
the risks of C-8.
However, we procured a
confidential document
from DuPont.
It's dated 1982, 34 years ago.
In it, Mr. Carr, the medical
director at the time,
expresses concern about the
consequences of C-8 retained
in the blood of employees.
He specifically recommends
that practical steps be
taken to reduce this exposure.
>> "All employees, not
just Teflon area workers,
are exposed."
So rather than do anything,
they just wrote it out.
I never seen a letter like that.
I'm mad.
You can see why.
We could have
prevented a lot of lies
if they wouldn't told
us there's a problem.
Why'd they cover it up?
Why'd they lie?
Why didn't they
have us protected?
Too costly?
>> We tracked down Bruce
Carr, DuPont's former medical
director.
He is now enjoying a
peaceful retirement
by the ocean, far
from Parkersburg.
>> I have a document of 1982
showing that you are aware that
C-8 was toxic for workers.
Why have you not told them
the truth at that time?
>> They were all told the truth.
They were told everything
we knew at the time.
>> Actually, no.
I have interviewed
some employees
and they were not
aware of anything.
>> We told employees everything
we knew as soon as we knew it.
You go back to
1982, you're trying
to do reconstructionist
history, and you can't do that.
>> Why have you not
protected your employees?
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH].
>> DuPont would not only put
their employees in danger,
once again, tens of thousands
of people would be affected.
They live up to 70 kilometers
away from the factory.
One man would discover
this, a bit by accident.
Joe Kiger.
On October 31, 2000,
he receives a letter
from the municipality concerning
the quality of the tap water.
It mentions C-8.
>> I was sitting in my courtyard
and the wife was watering
the flowers, and we got
our water bill in the mail,
and with that bill,
came a letter.
It's like, you get form
letters all the time.
So you look, that's all, OK,
bang, and you put it over
and you don't think about
it, next thing you know,
you throw it away.
And that's basically
what this was.
It just caught my attention and
I started reading through it,
and then the flags
started popping up.
First of all, what was C-8 here,
which is used by DuPont Works.
What's DuPont have
to do with our water?
>> Joe Kiger sought
clarification on the matter.
>> I called DuPont
to try to find out,
so they put me in touch with
a guy, a gentleman named Mr.
Kennedy, and I said, you know,
I'd like to know more about
this C-8 issue.
He's just telling
me it's nothing
to worry about, about it was
just a byproduct of Teflon
and it wasn't anything
to worry about.
And he was flat out lying to me.
I could tell that.
>> To get to the bottom of
it, he takes DuPont to court.
After a long legal
battle, the judge
forces the company to declassify
their internal studies on C-8.
Joe Kiger discovers the
truth behind the factory
at Parkersburg.
For decades, they've
been dumping C-8 waste
into the river.
To make things worse,
DuPont has known since 1984
that the molecules spread
into the region's tap water.
The company found astronomical
levels in public taps,
up to 50 times the
limit of toxicity
according to the US
Environmental Protection
Agency.
>> That was 1984 and we
didn't come out till 2000.
>> So 16 years.
>> Yeah, before we even
hit them up about it.
And they chose-- as
you see right here,
they chose not to do
anything about it.
And they knew what was
coming with the liabilities
if they got caught.
They were trying to
slide under the radar.
People trusted
DuPont for so long.
They have done nothing
but lie for years
to people about what
this stuff's all about.
There's sick people out here
because of what they've done.
There's people dying because
of what they've done.
>> During all these years, more
than 70,000 people have been
drinking contaminated water.
In 2011, both scientific
research and the US justice
system established
that C-8 could
cause six diseases, thyroid
disorder, high cholesterol,
ulcerative colitis, high
blood pressure, kidney cancer,
or testicular cancer.
Today, 3,500 people in the
Parkersburg region are ill.
They've all filed
complaints against DuPont.
This is the case for
Earl and Gwen Botkin.
>> I've had ulcerative
colitis for about 17 years,
and it's about killed
me a couple of times.
I still have thyroid problem,
and I have high cholesterol,
and those are all
associated with C-8.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Today, Earl Botkin
doesn't have a colon anymore.
He too is living
with an ostonomy bag.
>> All of a sudden, you
don't function normally.
You have your bowel
movement on your side.
And that's what I'll
live with until I die.
And there's not any--
not any hope that
that's going to change.
It controls where
I go, what I do,
and what I eat,
and just controls
a lot of things in my life.
But anyway, I
lived through that.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> A document reveals that all
of these victims could have
been spared.
On May 22, 1984, a
meeting took place
at the DuPont headquarters.
The directors are worried
about the consequences
for the inhabitants.
They plan to eliminate
all C-8 emissions.
>> I wanted to show you
these sentences here.
>> But finally, no
measures are taken.
Their argument, it's not
economically attractive.
>> That was in what year?
>> '84.
That's before we were married.
That's a long time ago.
>> Uh-huh, yeah.
>> Long, long time ago.
>> That's crazy.
That's what makes
it so bad, you know?
That they had evidence all
along and just disregarded it
and kept doing what
they were doing.
>> It was company greed that
caused this whole situation.
They knew what they
were doing to us,
and they continued
to do it for money.
That's the only reason
they continued to do it.
>> DuPont refuses to
collectively compensate
the 3,500 sick people.
They prefer to study
the cases one by one.
As a result, since
2012, only one victim
has been able to get a trial.
DuPont was sentenced to
pay her $1.6 million.
The 3,499 remaining
victims, like Earl Botkin,
are still waiting.
At the current
pace of the trials,
the last one would take
place in 100 years.
>> Do you still trust and you
are still confident that you
will get to trial at some point?
>> Oh--
>> If he lives long enough.
>> If I live to be 150, I might.
There will be a trial someday.
But the chances of me
living long enough to ever
see that probably slim to none.
We're just another
document, another number
of cases to be tried.
DuPont has made
billions of dollars.
I think they should stand
up to what they've done
and make it right with the
people they've made sick.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> DuPont refused all of our
requests for an interview,
so we drove to their
headquarters in Delaware
on the east coast to convince
them to answer our questions.
At the other end of
the line, we reached
the head of media
relations, Daniel Turner.
>> We are doing a
documentary piece.
The best way is we meet
and make a proper interview
at some point.
But first, let's meet.
I'm just here.
I think you can see me
here, I'm making signs.
>> We'll respectfully decline
an on-camera interview.
I will provide you
with a statement.
>> You know that there is
like, an incredible amount
of documentary that you
have known that DuPont,
for the past 30 years, that
C-8 was toxic and knew that you
were poisoning your employees
at the Washington Works Plant
and the Parkersburg citizen.
Why are you not recognizing the
fact that you have deliberately
poisoned thousands of persons?
>> OK, so is--
are those the questions
you're asking?
>> Yeah.
This is my questions.
>> OK, I'll be happy to
provide you with our statement.
>> Today, we are in 2016.
There are still 3,500
person with severe disease
that are waiting to just have
the right to get to trial.
I mean, for how
long are you going
to deny your responsibility?
Are you waiting
that they all die?
>> So we will provide you with
a statement for your piece.
>> Nothing else?
No?
>> Like I said, we will
provide you with a statement.
Thanks so much.
Have a good day.
Bye.
>> Bye.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We did receive a press
release from DuPont,
but without a single
word for the victims.
They claim to have, "studied
C-8 carefully for decades,"
and affirmed to have,
"always acted responsibly."
In 2015, DuPont finally
stopped using C-8.
The company was also
ordered by the courts
to clean up the region.
But how many
generations are still
to experience the after-effects
of this contamination?
In the chemical world,
history inexorably
tends to repeat itself.
It takes decades to
reveal the truth,
and just as many years
for the multinationals
to be prosecuted.
In their laboratories,
new toxic molecules
are constantly being developed.
But in 10, 20, 30,
or 40 years, who
knows how many new
victims will be poisoned.
[MUSIC PLAYING]